The inhabited depressions of the Libyan Desert, called by Herodotus
the ‘Islands of the Blest,’ are interesting alike to the
archæologist, to the geographer and geologist, and to the tourist
who wishes to wander from the well-beaten tracks, and perhaps
none more so than the Oasis of Kharga, lying 130 miles west of
Luxor—the site of ancient Thebes—and recently connected by
railway with the Nile Valley.

Descended from the ancient Libyans, the inhabitants of the Egyptian
oases (numbering over 30,000 souls) are quite distinct from the
Fellahin and Bedawin of the Nile Valley. Isolated by arid and
desolate wastes, these communities occupy quaint walled-in towns
and villages, tucked away among groves of palms, interspersed
with smiling gardens and fields of corn. Rain is almost unknown,
and rivers are non-existent, the trees and crops being irrigated
by bubbling wells, deriving their waters from deep-seated sources.

Kharga—the subject of the present memoir—formed part of the Great
Oasis of ancient days, and was governed in turn by the Pharaohs, the
Persian Monarchs, and the Roman Emperors. Through it the ill-fated
army of Cambyses is recorded to have marched, and in it is to be
seen the most important Persian monument in Egypt, the temple of
Hibis. But most interesting of all is the wonderfully preserved Early
Christian necropolis, dating from the time of Bishop Nestorius, who
was banished to Kharga in A.D. 434. Juvenal, Athanasius, and other
celebrities likewise appear to have made unwilling acquaintance
with this portion of the Roman Empire.

The character of the people at the present day—a curious mixture
of stupidity, apathy, and shrewdness—seems to reflect in great
measure their past history, as well as the peculiar conditions
under which they still live. A history of the inhabitants since
the withdrawal of the Roman garrisons would resolve itself into
an account of an endless combat with Nature, which, with sand and
wind as its chief agents, has never abated its efforts to recover
those tracts which the Ancients, by the exercise of much skill and
industry, wrested from the desert.